JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill is away this week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
contraception coverage and
online privacy
at the high court. We break down
today's Supreme
Court rulings.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Monday:
Bernie Sanders and Hillary
Clinton prepare
for two state primaries
tomorrow, while Donald
Trump faces his own battles as
the sole Republican
candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And decades after
war, the
Balkans struggle with differing
forms of Islam
and fight to shut down radical
mosques some
say are breeding terrorist
fighters.
RAZIM COLIC, Bosnian Islamic
Community: A
number of them, they have been
in contact
with some people outside
Bosnia-Herzegovina,
because this is not from Bosnia.
This has
been imported from somewhere
else.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is primary eve
for two more
states, and the Democratic
campaign in one
of them has heated up. That has
party divisions
on display again, and it leaves
the front-runner
fighting a two-front war.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Let's do everything we can to
win Kentucky
in November!
JOHN YANG: Hillary Clinton
blitzed the Bluegrass
State today, her sights on a
fall campaign
against Donald Trump.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Now,
some people might
say, oh, all anybody wants to
hear is just,
I'm going to do it, but I'm not
telling you
what I'm going to do.
See, I don't believe that.
Americans take
their vote for president
seriously. And they're
going to be looking at that TV
screen and
saying, he still doesn't have
anything to
tell us?
JOHN YANG: She's also trying to
break her
primary losing streak against
Democratic rival
Bernie Sanders.
NARRATOR: And she is the one who
will make
a real difference.
JOHN YANG: Clinton is running
her first TV
ads in weeks, and says she will
put her husband,
who won Kentucky twice, in
charge of revitalizing
the economy.
Sanders moved on to Puerto Rico
today, where
Democrats vote on June 5.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
It is unacceptable to me for the
United States
government to treat Puerto Rico
like a colony
during a time when its people
are facing the
worst fiscal and economic crisis
in its history.
JOHN YANG: The Clinton campaign
has written
off Oregon, which also votes
tomorrow, but
is competing hard in Kentucky.
She won the
state easily in 2008, but recent
comments
about putting coal miners out of
work have
hurt her. And so she wants to
avoid losing
twice on Tuesday.
Trump had a different target
today, British
Prime Minister David Cameron,
who called Trump's
plan to ban Muslims divisive,
stupid and wrong.
On Britain's Independent
Television News,
Trump fired back.
QUESTION: If you're president,
and he's the
British prime minister...
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
It looks like we're not going to
have a very
good relationship. Who knows? I
hope to have
a good relationship with him,
but it sounds
like he's not willing to address
the problem,
either.
JOHN YANG: Trump also blasted a
New York Times
story examining how he treats
women. A former
model who dated the New York
billionaire and
was quoted in the story says the
paper twisted
her words.
ROWANNE BREWER LANE, Once Dated
Donald Trump:
They spun it to where it
appeared negative.
I didn't have a negative
experience with Donald
Trump, and I don't appreciate
them making
it look like that I was saying
that it was
a negative experience.
JOHN YANG: Trump tweeted his own
take: "False
reporting, and plenty of it, but
we will prevail."
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will talk with
supporters
on both sides of the Democratic
race right
after the news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The U.S. and other world powers
announced
they're ready to arm the
internationally recognized
government of Libya. They want
an exemption
to a U.N. arms embargo to supply
weapons to
fight Islamic State forces.
Officials from
the U.S. and 20 other countries
met in Vienna.
Secretary of State John Kerry
said they want
to help Libya fight ISIS and
other militants.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: There
has been no request otherwise at
this point
in time for some other kind of
intervention.
We are simply in a mode of
trying to help
and assist and develop a Libyan
capacity to
be able to respond to the
challenge of security
within Libya.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Pentagon
confirmed today
that small teams of U.S. troops
are on the
ground assessing the situation.
The Washington
Post reported last week that
they're special
operations forces deployed at
two outposts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The capital of
Afghanistan
was on lockdown today as tens of
thousands
of minority Hazara sect
protested. They marched
in Kabul, demanding that a
planned multinational
power line be routed through
their province.
They argue it would will lift
the area out
of poverty. Police blocked off
roads in the
city, fearing possible violence.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The 50th
anniversary of
China's cultural revolution came
and went
with little official recognition
today. State
media were mostly silent on the
violent campaign
to revive communist goals that
began on May
16, 1966. Mao Zedong rallied the
youthful
Red Guard to persecute millions.
Today, many criticize the brutal
campaign.
ZAHO SHUNLI, Retired Red Guard
Member (through
translator): The 30 years after
the reforms
show that this was totally
wrong. The reforms
didn't bring any benefit to our
country, to
our lives. They didn't bring any
development
to our economy and our industry.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The cultural
revolution
officially ended with Mao's
death in 1976.
The ruling Communist Party
formally condemned
the movement in 1981.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, thousands
of low-income students will soon
be eligible
for federal Pell Grants to take
college courses
in high school. The Education
Department said
today it's earmarking about $20
million for
the next school year to help
about 10,000
students; 44 institutions, most
of them community
colleges, are expected to
participate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And Wall
Street rallied,
as rising oil prices pushed
energy stocks
higher. The Dow Jones industrial
average gained
175 points to close at 17710.
The Nasdaq rose
57 points, and the S&P 500 added
20.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Hillary Clinton's
last-minute push for votes in
Kentucky; the
Supreme Court sidesteps a key
contraceptive
ruling; Bosnian Muslims crack
down on allegedly
radical mosques; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We look ahead to
tomorrow's
primaries and divisions within
the Democratic
Party starting with Oregon.
It's junior U.S. Senator Jeff
Merkley is the
only member of the Senate to
endorse Bernie
Sanders for president.
And, Senator Merkley, we welcome
you to the
program.
I want to say, all the...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
All of the delegate projections
we see show
that it's all but impossible for
Bernie Sanders
to have enough delegates to win
this nomination.
So, what do you know that they
don't show?
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY (D), Oregon:
Well, it's
certainly is uphill. And it
would take two-thirds
of the delegates or the votes
for him to tie
Secretary Clinton.
But here's the thing. This is
such an important
conversation. Bernie is
mobilizing the grassroots.
He's exciting the base because
of his clear
vision that America is very much
off-track
and has to change in substantial
ways to address
the challenges for working
Americans.
And it needs to be possible for
the citizens
of Oregon and Kentucky and
California and
the Dakotas and New Jersey to
weigh in and
make their voices heard. If the
party is going
to come together, then it needs
to respect
everyone's opportunity to
participate in the
primaries.
And these issues are going to
continue to
reverberate, because,
fundamentally, America
is off-track.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I'm sure --
and I have
heard you say just, not just --
well, as long
as you have been supporting
Senator Sanders,
you said there is urgency to all
this. You
said we need big ideas.
I'm sure that Secretary Clinton
thinks she
has got big ideas, too, and she
agrees there
is urgency about all this.
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY: Well, she has
somewhat
criticized Bernie for his big
ideas, saying
let's move in little pieces. And
that -- we
are blessed with two terrific
candidates on
the Democratic side.
And they have good hearts and
good minds.
And we're going to unify going
into the convention
and then going into November.
But it's Bernie
who's saying small changes don't
address the
fact that nine out of 10
Americans have not
participated in the growing
prosperity of
America over the last four
decades, that huge
amounts of campaign cash are
unacceptable,
and we must radically change the
corruption
that has been enabled by
Citizens United in
our campaign system.
It's Bernie who came out and
said, Keep It
in the Ground bill is essential.
We have to
quit doing contracts to sell off
our fossil
fuels that you and I own, as
citizens. our
citizen-owned fossil fuels can
no longer be
leased out for pennies on the
acre.
If we're going to help lead the
world, we
have to change direction and we
have to change
quickly to address this threat
to our planet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, how far,
though, does
Senator Sanders want to push
this? I mean,
you know that a number of
Democrats, more
and more of them, are saying,
the longer he
stays in, the more it hurts
Secretary Clinton's
chances in the fall.
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY: Well, they're
really completely
wrong.
It's Bernie's campaign that is
generating
the grassroots network, the
passion. That
network is going to be very
important to the
victor in the Democratic
primary. It's why
everyone has to respect the
other side. But
after a week from Tuesday, when
virtually
every state will have weighed
in, we will
see a parallel to eight years
ago.
It is June 7 or 8 that then
Senator Clinton
said, I understand that I am not
going to
win this, we need to start
bringing the two
sides together. And they worked
on doing that
to set the stage for the
convention. And I
anticipate -- I can't speak
directly for the
Bernie campaign on this, but I
anticipate
something similar, should
Secretary Clinton
have the majority of pledge
delegates a week
from Tuesday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you're saying
you expect
Senator Sanders to work with
Senator Clinton
by the end of these primaries?
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY: Yes, by the
end of eight
days from now.
And it isn't that they will
instantly come
together. There is a negotiation
that needs
to take place. People who are
part of the
Bernie Sanders camp, should
Clinton prevail,
are going to need to know that
she has heard
them, she has listened to them,
that she understands
their frustration and shares in
their desire
to make some substantial changes
in the direction
our nation is going.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what does he
do about those
voters who have supported him
who are telling
pollsters they're going to look
at Donald
Trump in November?
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY: He can be the
single most
important voice in that regard,
helping to
bring folks together, if he is
not the nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you mean?
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY: Well, if he
doesn't win
the nomination, those folks who
have been
supporting him are going to turn
to him to
see his insight on the
partnership that's
being crafted with Secretary
Clinton's team,
and that for him to vouch for
that partnership
would be the most essential
element in bringing
the two sides together.
There are others of us who will
work very
hard to bring the two sides
together, but
the responsibility first and
foremost will
come with Secretary Clinton and
with Senator
Sanders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you confident
that they
can come together before the
convention?
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY: I am, because
I know that,
from the very beginning, Bernie
Sanders has
said, if he's not the nominee,
he's going
to make absolutely sure we don't
end up with
the situation like we did with
Ralph Nader,
where, essentially, we handed
over an election
to a Republican, a Republican
who put our
nation way off-track, that the
nation can't
afford that.
And, certainly, all the goals
that Senator
Sanders has for improving our
nation would
not be served by that outcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Jeff
Merkley of Oregon,
we thank you.
SEN. JEFF MERKLEY: You're
welcome. And thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to Kentucky,
where Hillary Clinton has been
campaigning
aggressively in recent days,
hoping, of course,
for a win there.
Congressman John Yarmuth is
backing Secretary
Clinton. He's the lone Democrat
in the Bluegrass
State's congressional
delegation.
Congressman Yarmuth, good to see
you. Thank
you for being with us.
REP. JOHN YARMUTH (D), Kentucky:
Sure, Judy.
Good to be with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I don't know if
you just heard
Senator Merkley say that, yes,
it looks like
Senator Sanders will be able to
sit down and
work with Secretary Clinton if
she has the
most delegates after the end of
these primaries,
but he also said that Senator
Sanders is going
to fight for every vote he can
until the end
of this primary process.
REP. JOHN YARMUTH: Yes, well, I
think that's
fine.
I think, ultimately, the real
critical factor
will be what they do after it is
clear that
Secretary Clinton will be the
nominee and
has won enough delegates. I
don't really worry
too much about the campaign
rhetoric. I mean,
nobody has said meaner things
about a candidate
in their own party than
Republicans have done,
and now they seem to be doing
some kind of
a marital ritual going on now.
So, I think, ultimately, what
happens after
Hillary reaches that threshold
of delegates
is the most important thing. And
then it will
be -- I think it will be truly
up to Bernie
Sanders to prove that this whole
thing with
the Democratic Party wasn't just
a charade,
that he actually wants to see
Democratic values
advanced in the fall.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, you say
it's up to Senator
Sanders. We just heard Senator
Merkley say
it's going to be up to Secretary
Clinton to
show that she cares about these
issues, like
big money in American politics,
like too many
Americans not benefiting from
the economic
growth we have seen.
REP. JOHN YARMUTH: You know, I
was with her
for five hours yesterday in
Louisville. That's
all she talked about.
I think there is no question
that she has
met that test. She is clearly
concerned about
economic parity in the
workplace, about minimizing
the income and the wealth gap in
this country.
She has detailed policies on
things like workplace
fairness, paid medical leave,
early childhood
education, all the free
community college
education, debt-free college
education.
These are things that are
clearly on her platform,
and she talks about them every
day. So, I
don't think there is going to be
much distance
between Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders
once the rhetoric stops.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What --
Congressman Yarmuth,
what does Secretary Clinton,
though, need
to do to appeal to the voters
she's been struggling
to win over a majority of? And
I'm talking
about the millennials, the
younger voters.
Those voters, it's remarkable,
when you look
at the exit polls of voters in
the last few
states that have held their
primary votes,
West Virginia, Indiana,
Wisconsin, New York,
the percentage of voters who say
they don't
consider Secretary Clinton
trustworthy. What
does she need to do to turn that
around?
REP. JOHN YARMUTH: Well, she
just needs to
keep speaking frankly about her
record, about
the things that she cares about.
And, ultimately, you know, we
have got so
much noise in this campaign. And
I think the
people who are listening to
Bernie Sanders
aren't listening to much else,
just like the
people who are listening to
Donald Trump aren't
listening to much else.
I think, once it's a one-on-one
race, you
have the comparison of somebody
who has basically
double-crossed everybody he's
come in contact
with during his business career,
and you have
somebody who has worked steadily
for four
decades now to help the middle
class and to
help people get into the middle
class, I think
the choice will be very, very
clear for all
those people who are now so
enthusiastic about
Bernie.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But don't you
still have a
pretty considerable amount of
repair work
to do between Secretary Clinton
and Senator
Sanders? I read just today a
release from
the senator's press office
saying, we call
on Secretary Clinton to some
distorting the
truth about Senator Sanders'
record on supporting
the automakers, people who work
in the auto
industry.
REP. JOHN YARMUTH: Well, again,
this is the
normal campaign rhetoric.
And I think every candidate on
both sides
of the partisan divide are
guilty of some
exaggeration and stretching
voting records
and characterizing the other
opponent. That's
going to happen.
But, again, the proof will be,
once it's one
on one, and Bernie Sanders faces
that choice,
and his supporters do, of
whether Hillary
Clinton or Donald Trump will be
a better commander
in chief, will be a better
leader for working
Americans, I don't think there
is any question
who they are going to be for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, very
quickly, Congressman,
do you think Secretary Clinton
will win your
state, Kentucky, tomorrow, and
do you think
she can win it in the fall?
REP. JOHN YARMUTH: Well, I think
she will
win tomorrow. She's won I think
virtually
every state where there has been
a closed
primary, where only Democrats
can vote.
Even in West Virginia, she
carried the majority
of Democrats who voted. Forty
percent of the
people who voted in the
Democratic primary
there weren't Democrats. In
Kentucky, Democrats
only can vote. She is very, very
popular,
she and her husband, in
Kentucky. He carried
the state twice.
I think she can make it
competitive in the
fall. Clearly, it is going to be
tough, tough
sled for a Democratic candidate
to win the
electoral votes of Kentucky. But
she has promised
me she's going to try. She
thinks she can
make it competitive. And I'm
going to be there
helping her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman John
Yarmuth, it's
good to see you. Thank you.
REP. JOHN YARMUTH: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we break down
the math
and the movement for the
Democrats and for
Republicans facing the reality
of Donald Trump
at the top of their ticket with
our Politics
Monday team, Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR.
And welcome back to both of you.
It is Monday.
So, Amy Walter, you just heard
from Senator
Merkley. You heard from
Congressman Yarmuth.
What is the state of this
Democratic contest
right now?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
I think they summed it up pretty
well, which
is, there have been skirmishes
in this race,
but there is not a big, gaping
wound here
that Democrats or the Democratic
nominee,
specifically Hillary Clinton, is
going to
have to heal.
And we have talked about this
before, but
the real challenge for the
Democrats going
forward -- and I think you have
pointed this
out, too -- is more generational
than it is
anything else, but that Donald
Trump helps
to generate enthusiasm where
Hillary Clinton
cannot.
And so where she may have
trouble getting
those young voters who have been
turning out
for Bernie Sanders, it is very
hard to believe
that those voters are going to
go to Donald
Trump. And, in fact, what may be
getting them
out to vote is going to be
Donald Trump, enthusiastically
voting against him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tamara, you have
been talking,
I think, to the Clinton people
today. Do they
think it is going to be
relatively easy to
come together with Senator
Sanders when all
this is over?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: They
are not entirely clear on that.
Senator Sanders
is, you know, doing the process
that Senator
Sanders needs to do to get to
where he is
comfortable and where he can get
his voters
to come along.
I think that, if Bernie Sanders,
the day after
voting in Washington, D.C.,
flipped a switch
and said, I endorse Hillary
Clinton, I don't
know his supporters would buy
it. So I think
that Bernie Sanders is in a
process and the
Clinton people are -- in some
ways are just
watching it of figuring out how
he does move
forward. And Senator Merkley
talked about
some of that.
AMY WALTER: And I think they
have surrogates
that can help to do that, too.
I totally agree with Tamara that
Bernie Sanders
going out and saying to
supporters, OK, it's
time to go and support Hillary
Clinton, I
don't know if they would
actually believe
that.
But, right now, you're already
starting to
see two of the most important
people on the
Democratic side, President Obama
and Senator
Elizabeth Warren, both taking
aim at Donald
Trump, basically saying to
Democrats, even
though they haven't formally
endorsed Hillary
Clinton, you guys, it's time to
get serious
about the general election. We
know who we're
up against. It's Donald Trump.
Let's focus
our attention on him, get away
from the fighting.
And I think you will also see
President Obama
playing a very big role in the
November campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking of
Donald Trump,
Tamara, today and over the
weekend, there
was a lot of reaction to several
news stories
about the presumptive Republican
nominee,
the one that we just heard in
John Yang's
report about his encounters with
a number
of different women over the
years, over the
past few decades.
Some of them, he dated. Some of
them worked
for him. Some of them, he knew
in beauty contests.
As we also saw, one of the women
who was described
as being critical of him in that
New York
Times story is now saying she
was taken out
of context.
Where does this all come down?
Is he affected
by this in a serious way?
TAMARA KEITH: And I will say
that, in the
time that you have been on the
air, Donald
Trump has been on yet another
tweet storm
about this story.
And on Twitter, he just tweeted
that The New
York Times interviewed 50 women,
and they
only used six of them, and those
six were
the ones that didn't fit their
narrative.
So, Donald Trump is on a rail
about this,
which is interesting.
This article is not necessarily
his biggest
problem when it comes to female
voters. He
has a challenge with female
voters as it is.
There is a treasure trove for
opposition researchers
of interviews that he has done
over the years
with Donald Stern, for instance
-- or with
Howard Stern, where he said some
pretty crude
things over the years, because
that's the
format of that show.
So this is probably not the last
time we are
going to hear these kinds of
things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it a problem,
Amy, for him?
AMY WALTER: You know, I think
the challenge
right now for Democrats and for
anybody else
who doesn't want to see Donald
Trump elected
is that voters are willing to
forgive a certain
amount about Donald Trump,
especially the
Donald Trump of the '80s and
'90s, who was
an entertainer, who wasn't
running for president.
And I think the challenge will
be for them
to focus on what his policies
and positions
mean for people as president,
rather than
what he's done in his time in
the '80s and
'90s. I don't think it helps
Democrats to
focus on that, just as I don't
think it helps
Republicans to rehash the '90s
and Bill Clinton
and his problems with women.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we know that
-- Amy and
Tam, we know that a number of
news media organizations,
certainly The Washington Post,
has said that
they are assigning a large
number of reporters
to look into Donald Trump's
history. They
said they're doing the same
thing about Hillary
Clinton.
And yet we're already seeing the
difficulty
in this, I guess you would call
it a relationship
between the news media and
Donald Trump's
candidacy. It's already
incredibly prickly.
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and it's a
real challenge
for the news media, a challenge
that we in
the media haven't always met
particularly
well.
Donald Trump, if you just want
to focus on
policy, he, at times, seems to
be saying different
things on the same policy in the
same interview,
and it presents a real
challenge.
But, for him, that's totally --
that's part
of his brand. Donald Trump's
brand has been
that he shoots from the hip,
that he's the
guy who says it like it is. And
all of that
fits for him.
So, I think that the Clinton
campaign and
Democrats are going to have this
challenge
of how they figure out -- you
know, calling
him a flip-flopper isn't going
to really be
a problem for Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It is a
challenge.
AMY WALTER: That is the biggest
And I think those of us in the
media and those
of us inside Washington, we hear
somebody
that talks about being flexible
on issues,
and we say, as Tam pointed out,
they're a
flip-flopper or they don't have
an ideological
core.
And a lot of voters look at that
and go, well,
of course he should be flexible.
If you're
going to get real stuff done, if
you're going
to compromise, if you're going
to make deals,
you have got to be flexible
around the edges.
And so, you know, going in and
talking about
Donald Trump's positions
specifically are
going to be difficult, which I
think is why
you're going to hear a lot about
his judgment.
Is this the kind of person who
has the judgment
and the temperament to do the
job as president?
And, look, they are going to
talk about his
relationships with women and
what it would
mean in terms of his judgment
and his temperament
going forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's pretty
clear that
the Trump campaign trying to
change the subject.
I'm just being told by our
producer that the
Trump campaign has just
announced that he
is going to be meeting with
former Secretary
of State Henry Kissinger...
AMY WALTER: Of course.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... later --
later this week.
Much more to talk about. Hoping
to get to
what is happening to this effort
to find an
alternative in the Republican
Party to Donald
Trump.
Does either one of you want to
say that that
is going to go anywhere right
now?
Tam?
TAMARA KEITH: I would like to
say that it
is probably not going anywhere.
It's late
in the game, very late in the
game.
And experts who have looked at
this thing
-- the person looking who was at
it for Michael
Bloomberg to see if it would be
possible for
him to jump in, they felt like
they were late,
and that was months ago.
AMY WALTER: Concur. It should
have -- if they
wanted to have an alternative,
it should have
happened about six to eight
months ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, thank
you.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was a busy
day at the
Supreme Court. The justices
weighed in on
a handful of cases, including
what was supposed
to be one of this term's
blockbusters: a dispute
pitting religious freedom
against mandate
to cover contraception under the
Affordable
Care Act.
But the eight justices failed to
offer a definitive
decision, sending the case back
down to lower
federal courts.
President Obama addressed the
decision, and
speculated there might have been
a different
outcome if the vacancy left by
the late Justice
Scalia had been filled. He spoke
with BuzzFeed
News.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Women will still continue to be
able to get
contraception if they are
getting health insurance.
And we are properly
accommodating religious
institutions who have objections
to contraception.
I won't speculate as to why they
punted, but
my suspicion is, if we had nine
Supreme Court
justices, instead of eight,
there might have
been a different outcome.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We break down
the short-handed
court and its rulings today with
chief Washington
correspondent for "The National
Law Journal"
and "NewsHour" regular Marcia
Coyle.
Marcia, we spoke about this when
the justices
seemed to ask for more
information from everyone,
trying to figure out a third
way. So here
was a decision without really a
decision.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Well, actually, that third way
was sort of
an opening for the court.
Right after oral arguments, when
it looked
like the court was going to
divide 4-4, they
issued a special order telling
the parties,
the government and the nonprofit
employers,
to brief their own suggested
compromise, a
compromise offered by the court
itself.
Well, when the brief came back,
Hari, it really
didn't look like there was a lot
of room for
compromise there. But there was
enough there
that the court, in its opinion
today, which
was an unsigned opinion read by
the chief
justice from the bench, the
court said, look,
it looks as though there's been
movement on
both sides here. Let's give the
parties the
opportunity in the lower courts
to develop
it before we, as the Supreme
Court, would
get involved in it.
And that's what they did. They
said specifically
they wouldn't decide whether the
government's
plan in practice now to
accommodate religious
objections substantially
burdened these employers'
exercise of religion or whether
the government
had a compelling interest here
or was choosing
the least restrictive means to
achieve that
interest, which is the test
under the federal
Religious Freedom Restoration
Act.
So, they vacated the lower court
decisions
in the seven cases that they had
before them,
and then they also had an
additional six cases
that were awaiting the outcome
in today's
decision. They vacated the lower
court rulings
in those cases, overwhelmingly
had been in
favor of the government.
And, basically, those federal
appellate courts
will be starting now from
scratch to see if
there really is an opening for a
compromise
here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, if you're
starting over
from scratch, doesn't that mean
that they
could come either back to the
same conclusion
or, if you have got a number of
courts, perhaps
there will be a disagreement and
then this
-- the merits of the case come
back in front
of the Supreme Court?
MARCIA COYLE: Absolutely.
If either side is unhappy with
the result,
they can come back to the
Supreme Court. In
fact, there was a separate
concurrence by
Justice Sotomayor joined by
Justice Ginsburg
in which they said, the court is
not ruling
on the merits here, so if the
lower courts
end up reaching the same legal
results they
did before, that's what happens,
and then
the next step will follow.
But they also said that the
nonprofit employers'
suggestion that there should be
contraceptive-only
insurance policies was not
workable. Those
policies did not exist,
according to the government,
and would not provide the
seamless health
insurance coverage that Congress
intended
under the act.
So they sort -- those two
justices, at least,
have drawn a line in terms of
what they might
accept.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
let's talk of
the second case that kind of
came out today
was, again, another non-decision
to kick it
down.
Spokeo, this was the online
search engine
and the type of results someone
could get
and whether, I guess, they have
standing or
not to sue for it.
MARCIA COYLE: Right.
Spokeo, as you said, is an
Internet search
engine. And it had put up online
certain information
about a man named Tom Robins.
And that information
was largely incorrect. And he
claimed that
that injured him in a number of
ways, including
his job prospects.
He was looking for a new job at
the time.
Credit information was wrong
about him. So,
he sued, saying that Spokeo's
procedural violations
under the federal Credit -- Fair
Credit Reporting
Act harmed him.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right.
MARCIA COYLE: And the question
before the
court was basically, can just
saying that
a violation of that act alone
give you the
legal right or standing to sue?
And the court today sent the
case back to
the lower federal appellate
courts, saying,
basically, what you said here
is, you only
did half the analysis for
standing. You found
that there was a particularized
injury to
Mr. Robins, but the other half
is, it has
to be a concrete injury.
And so Spokeo will now get
another chance
at defending itself. The
standard is clear
and tightened. On the other
hand, the court
gave something to Mr. Robins,
saying that
some injuries aren't tangible,
they can be
intangible, and you can use that
under this
act.
So, it was probably not a very
satisfying
decision to either side. And big
business
had watched this case closely,
because it
felt that it's too easy to sue
under the Fair
Credit Reporting Act, another
act, at least
three other federal laws
involving consumers,
and they were hoping for a
definitive answer
today.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Does this
narrow then the
scope of which -- what is the
sort of threshold
where somebody could bring a
lawsuit? Is that
a win for big business?
MARCIA COYLE: It tightens it up
a little bit,
but it's a narrow decision, and
I think it's
a narrow decision because the
court, again,
is striving to find consensus in
these cases,
since it's missing a ninth
justice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
bit about this.
Are we seeing a pattern of 4-4
decisions here
that would be different, as the
president
said, if there was a fifth
justice -- or a
ninth justice?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, I think,
Hari, we're seeing
more of those decisions without
a ninth justice.
Clearly, the court is struggling
to reach
some kind of a consensus and
trying to avoid
those 4-4 splits. The court has
already decided
the big union case involving
fair share fees
by non-union members paid to
public employee
unions. There, they divided 4-4.
They divided 4-4 in an Equal
Opportunity Act
case earlier in the term. And
just last week,
in a death penalty case, the
justices split
4-4 on a request by Alabama to
block a lower
federal appellate court's order
temporarily
delaying the execution of an
Alabama death
row inmate.
We are going to have to wait
now, I think,
Hari, to see how the court
resolves the remaining
cases. There are still a few
very big cases
with very difficult issues
facing them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Marcia Coyle,
thanks.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
black hole blues,
recording the soundtrack of
outer space.
But, first, in
Bosnia-Herzegovina, the
country's
reputedly moderate ruling
Islamic community
is cracking down on dozens of
radical mosques.
The head of that community is on
guard after
his life was threatened by
extremists. The
radical mosques will be shut
down unless they
come under the council's
control. But there
are doubts whether these small,
mainly rural
mosques pose the greatest threat
in terms
of radicalization.
A former Bosnian intelligence
officer has
told the "NewsHour" that Western
allies should
be more concerned about the risk
from a huge
Saudi-sponsored mosque in the
capital, Sarajevo.
Special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: I'm in Central
Bosnia, about
100 miles from the capital,
Sarajevo.
I'm heading up to a remote
mountain village
called Osve, which is a place
where, supposedly,
there are some supporters of the
so-called
Islamic State. There have been
people who've
gone from this village to fight
in Syria.
Some have reportedly been
killed. And we're
going to meet somebody who used
to play rock
'n' roll, but is now labeled by
the head of
the Islamic community in Bosnia
as someone
who is a terrorist.
Izet Hadzic used to be lead
guitarist in a
band called Black Lady. After
fighting in
the Bosnian War, he abandoned
what he thought
was a decadent lifestyle and
sought peace
in religion. He leads one of
these so-called
radical mosques. While he's in
dispute with
the Islamic establishment, he
insists he's
no terrorist.
IZET HADZIC, Mosque Leader
(through translator):
Where does it come from to call
us terrorists?
It is because that people who
look like us,
have these beards, are doing
such acts in
the world, specifically ISIS and
this cretin
Baghdadi.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Two doors away
from Hadzic's
small holding is the father of a
young man
killed in Syria. Next door is a
family Hadzic
regards as extreme. Bosnian
intelligence officers
are frequent visitors.
Hadzic unequivocally condemns
Islamic State.
IZET HADZIC (through
translator): You can't
call this jihad. To take a gun
while someone
is walking down the street with
his family
and begin to shoot? Can you
imagine soldier
doing this? These people are
equal to cowards.
MALCOLM BRABANT: We had a
polite, but frosty
reception in Bocinje, a nearby
village that
was a stronghold of foreign
mujahideen during
the Bosnian War. We hoped to
interview a man
who returned from Syria in 2014,
but he didn't
want to be filmed because of an
impending
court case. His name is Ibrahim
Delic.
Dozens of other Bosnians now in
Syria are
said to want to return because
they are horrified
by ISIS atrocities. Crippled and
radicalized
during the Bosnian War, Delic
recently talked
to the Balkan Investigative
Reporting Network.
Significantly, he criticized the
Free Syrian
Army, who are enemies of ISIS.
IBRAHIM DELIC, Fought in Bosnian
War (through
translator): That Free Syrian
Army, that is
one scum army. Sometimes, they
picked a girl,
took her, raped a girl, gave her
back home,
or they killed her.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The flag in
this video shot
in Syria is not that of Islamic
State. Delic
is telling a crowd to fight for
Islam. He
insists he didn't commit any
crimes.
IBRAHIM DELIC (through
translator): When I
saw that, at the checkpoints,
they started
to stop foreigners who came to
fight, when
I saw Free Syrian Army soldiers
taking guns
away from them and killing them
for the gun
or for the little money they
had, these foreign
guys started to attack back. And
at that moment,
I knew that a big conflict among
them is going
to happen.
I asked some people to help get
me back across
the border.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This poor rural
village contains
several Serb families, once the
sworn enemies
of Islamists. But subsistence
farmer Milan
Petrovic insists he's happy to
live here.
MILAN PETROVIC, Farmer (through
translator):
To tell you the truth, they are
our good neighbors.
We have no problems. They greet
us, we greet
them. We don't have any
problems.
MALCOLM BRABANT: To get an
assessment of the
risk posed by radical Islamists
in Bosnia,
we visited a murder scene, in
truth, a mocked-up
murder scene used for training
students at
the Department of Criminology at
Sarajevo
University.
Professor Goran Kovacevic, a
Serb, is an expert
on Islamic radicals and spent
seven years
as an agent with Bosnian
intelligence.
GORAN KOVACEVIC, Professor,
Sarajevo University:
They are not radicals like they
are presented
in the media. For example, you
have in the
United States Amish groups
behaving in a similar
manner.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The big
difference is that
the Amish are avowed pacifists.
The radicals
are total opposites, according
to officials
of Bosnia's Islamic community.
The organization claims it is
trying to preserve
moderate Koranic principles
practiced in Bosnia
since the country was conquered
by the Ottoman
Empire in the 15th century.
International relations director
Razim Colic
says hard-line mosques are the
product of
extreme foreign influence.
RAZIM COLIC, Bosnian Islamic
Community: As
the passage of time, these
people got radicalized.
A number of them, they have been
in contact
with some people outside
Bosnia-Herzegovina,
because this is not from Bosnia.
It has been
imported from somewhere else.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Since issuing
an edict effectively
outlawing the radical mosques,
Bosnia's Muslim
spiritual leader, Husein
Kavazovic, seen here
at an inauguration ceremony, has
required
additional security.
RAZIM COLIC: They told that they
are -- when
they come here, they will
slaughter him in
the middle of Sarajevo. So, we
are probably
the first target, because they
take us as
infidels.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But concerns
have been raised
about the huge Saudi-funded King
Fahd Mosque,
one of several that have changed
not just
Sarajevo's skyline, but also
allegedly the
way of thinking.
Yet, nominally, it's controlled
by the Bosnian
Islamic community.
GORAN KOVACEVIC: People should
be worried
about this mosque. They will
have a lot of
money. That's the most radical
mosque in the
whole Bosnia-Herzegovina. But
it's under formal
Islamic community. And it's not
ever mentioned
as a part about this story of
these illegal
religious communities.
And that's the most radical. All
those guys
that actually performed some
kind of terrorist
activity in Bosnia-Herzegovina
were part of
that mosque, and nobody is
mentioning that.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Certainly, the
King Fahd
Mosque doesn't welcome scrutiny.
We were some
distance away because of a sign
at the entrance
banning filming. Just a few
moments after
the call to prayer began, the
police arrived.
WOMAN: The King Fahd guys were
calling because
they saw us filming. So I said,
we are doing
nothing wrong. What you can do,
you can write
our names and let it be, let us
be.
MALCOLM BRABANT: I'm sorry.
Yesterday, we
were talking to the foreign
relations guy
in charge of the Islamic
council, and we were
told that there's absolutely no
problem, they
can be perfectly open about it,
so what's
the problem?
Via text messages, we complained
about our
half-hour encounter with the
police to Colic
of the Islamic community, who,
despite his
position, had been unable to
allow us to film
inside the mosque. He dismissed
our complaints
and also rejected the concerns
of the former
intelligence agent.
RAZIM COLIC: I simply don't
agree with the
officer.
MALCOLM BRABANT: So, what is the
-- the sort
of message that is coming out
those mosques
then?
RAZIM COLIC: I don't know that
we don't have
-- the message...
(CROSSTALK)
MALCOLM BRABANT: Do you monitor
the mosques?
RAZIM COLIC: Sorry?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Do you monitor
the mosques
to hear what they're saying?
RAZIM COLIC: Yes, yes, yes, of
course.
MALCOLM BRABANT: How frequently
do you do
that?
RAZIM COLIC: On a daily basis,
because we
have five times a day prayer
there. Our imams,
the three of them are there.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Late last
month, Margaret
Cormack, the piano-playing U.S.
ambassador,
hosted CIA Director John Brennan
when he made
a surprise visit to Sarajevo to
discuss the
country's counterterrorism
efforts.
Ambassador Cormack regards the
Bosnian Islamic
community as a crucial partner
in the battle
against radicalization. But she
had a clear
message for Muslim nations and
their vested
interests.
MARGARET CORMACK, U.S.
Ambassador to
Bosnia-Herzegovina:
We need these countries to allow
Bosnia and
Herzegovina to maintain its
traditional moderate
version of Islam.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Given the
uncertainty about
which Muslims potentially pose
the greatest
risk, can she be certain that
the U.S. and
its allies are getting the right
information
from Sarajevo?
MARGARET CORMACK: Certainly, all
the U.S.
security teams who either work
inside of our
embassy or who have visited from
Washington
feel that we have a really
positive, open
information-sharing with our
colleagues, our
counterparts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We don't have a sense that there
are blockages
in that. What we have worked
with them on
is establishing better
information-sharing
between the services here in the
country,
and I think that they're making
progress in
that regard as well.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Analysts like
Dino Abazovic,
a specialist in conflict and its
aftermath,
are certain that poverty is also
a precursor
for radicalization.
DINO ABAZOVIC, University of
Sarajevo: A number
of people, particularly
youngsters, younger
generation are seeing no future
in the way
of their prospects for
employment and all
these things. More than 40
percent of Bosnia
population is officially
unemployed.
In that respect, I would say is
the kind of
circumstances that are
fertilizing a fertile
ground for different kinds of
radicalization.
So, unfortunately, anyone who
neglects social
and economic situation that
these people are
living in are -- I think is
wrong.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Bosnia's
enduring economic
crisis requires members of the
country's top
rock band, Konvoj, to take
second jobs to
support their music careers.
They are advocates
for the ideal of Sarajevo as a
multicultural
city and are horrified by
increasing international
hostility towards Muslims.
MAN: It's pretty -- wow, what's
happening
now in the world?
BOJAN CRNOGORAC, Konvoj: I have
been with
these people all of my life. My
best friend
is a Muslim. He was the best man
at my wedding.
I was the best man at his
wedding. My parents
told me not to divide people
according to
nationality or ethnic.
People here are normal. I think
that's the
kind of media stuff that's
pumping all this
situation in Bosnia.
MALCOLM BRABANT: International
officials are
convinced that Bosnia's
European, Westernized
moderate Muslims are the best
possible bulwark
against radicalization. But in a
country awash
with weapons left over from the
war, the need
for enhanced vigilance is
paramount.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Sarajevo.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was big
news in February
when scientists announced they
had at long
last detected gravitational
waves from space.
Albert Einstein had predicted
the existence
of these waves in his general
theory of relativity,
but they're rather hard to see
or, as we learn
in our latest "NewsHour"
Bookshelf conversation,
to hear.
Jeffrey Brown has that.
JEFFREY BROWN: The sound lasted
about a fifth
of a second, but it represented
gravitational
waves created by the collision
of two black
holes with the combined mass of
about 62 of
our suns a billion light years
away.
"Black Hole Blues and Other
Songs from Outer
Space" is a story of things
extraordinarily
small and hard-to-comprehend
large, and of
the human drama in discovering
them.
Author Janna Levin is a
physicist and astronomer
at Barnard College. She's also
author of a
novel, "A Madman Dreams of
Turing Machines."
So, the blues, we're sort of in
the realm
of metaphor here, but the idea
is to hear
the universe, at least as
aspects that we
can't possibly see.
JANNA LEVIN, Author, "Black Hole
Blues and
Other Songs from Outer Space":
Yes, most of
what we know about the universe
really does
come to us from light.
And we have telescopes that span
the range
of light to take pictures of the
sky. This
is utterly different. This is
not a form of
light. So when the black holes
collided, they
were like mallets on the drum.
They rang space-time
itself.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you have got
to be able
to hear them.
JANNA LEVIN: Right. So, you have
to be able
to record the shape of the drum.
And that's basically what this
experiment
did. It recorded the shape of
the ringing
drum from two black holes that
collided 1.3
billion years ago.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so
step back and
explain to us as simply as you
can, what is
a gravitational wave? And why is
it important
to our understanding of things?
JANNA LEVIN: Yes. Yes.
So, a gravitational wave is
really a ripple
or a change in the shape of
space and time
itself. So, if you were floating
near these
colliding black holes, you would
literally
be squeezed and stretched. And
you would experience
this squeezing and stretching.
It emanates
from this collision. It causes
these ripples
in space, kind of like fish
swirling in a
pond causing water waves.
And then they emanate out. They
travel at
the speed of light, even though
they are not
light. And eventually they make
it here to
the Earth. If you were floating
nearby, you
might even literally hear the
wave, because
your ear could respond to the
vibrations.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you're
telling it through
the human drama. You have got
some really
incredible characters, three of
them most
of all, who are at the
beginning. Tell us
a little bit about that.
JANNA LEVIN: So, I really do
think it was
kind of a climbing Mount Everest
story, an
adventure story.
People like Rai Weiss, who just
dreamed up
this idea of, how could you
record the shape
of space-time ringing? And it
was sort of
what he called a haiku, didn't
even believe
anything real could come of it.
He started
this in the late '60s.
Later comes Kip Thorne, who is a
brilliant
theoretical astrophysicist. And
they kind
of pull resources. And
eventually Ron Drever
comes in. And now, after 50
years, there's
800, 1,000 people working on
this campaign.
JEFFREY BROWN: And they in a
sense sort of
bet their careers, right?
JANNA LEVIN: At the time that
when people
like Rai and Kip were dreaming
about these
things, people were not even
sure that black
holes were real.
And there was a lot of argument
in the astrophysics
community even about
gravitational waves themselves,
if they were real. So, they were
doing this
almost out of a compulsion. It
really is like
climbing a mountain. They just
couldn't stop.
And the whole community was not
in favor of
this experiment. I think that is
not as widely
know when we celebrated the
discovery, that
there were a lot of people that
were not in
favor of building this machine.
JEFFREY BROWN: In telling the
story of the
human drama, inevitably, you get
into jealousies,
you get into failures, you get
into all kinds
of human dramas.
JANNA LEVIN: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: But that is part
of the story.
JANNA LEVIN: Well, I think what
people don't
appreciate is, that's really how
science is
done.
People think that we just come
down with these
answers. As scientists, we are
full of answers.
That's really not what it is
like. Scientists
are full of questions.
Sometimes, the questions
don't lead you to the answer,
but, sometimes,
they do, and there is this great
discovery.
But, yes, there is fighting
along the way.
There is competition. There are
failures and
successes. And at the end of the
climb, some
people made it to the summit,
and some people
didn't.
JEFFREY BROWN: Tell me about
your own way
into this. You write. You study
this. You
write about black holes.
JANNA LEVIN: Yes.
I have spent a lot of time
thinking about
black holes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
JANNA LEVIN: And I'm a
theoretical astrophysicist.
So I work on pen and paper.
It is very abstract. It is kind
of solitary.
And I originally wanted just to
write kind
of abstract treaties about black
holes, but
I got lost into this LIGO story
in part because
I became so enamored of the
physicality of
the experiment. I went out to
the sites, these
four-kilometer-long machines.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, we should
say LIGO is
the name of...
JANNA LEVIN: LIGO is the name of
the two machines
that together form this network
of observatories.
And I just couldn't believe that
they were
pulling it off, and I just loved
going to
the sites and watching people
install the
components and make this real,
make it physical,
metal and glass.
JEFFREY BROWN: That side of you
that is a
writer as well -- I mentioned
you are a novelist.
JANNA LEVIN: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you like
combining the storytelling
of the science.
JANNA LEVIN: Right.
So, I would be talking to Rai
Weiss, who was
one of the original architects.
And the way
he spoke about some of his
original ambitions
and how he couldn't stop, and
even a month
before the discovery would say
things to me
like, if we don't discover black
holes, this
thing is a failure.
And I became so sort of caught
up in that,
I realized that this could
actually read like
a novel. And if you followed
these characters,
you could understand not only
the process
of science, but the internal
ambitions and
the drives.
JEFFREY BROWN: So you are doing
all this work
for the book. In the meantime,
the work is
going on.
And then there is this
announcement that we
all get in February.
JANNA LEVIN: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was a shock
that it came
that quickly, right?
JANNA LEVIN: Whenever I asked
people, will
you make a discovery in the
science round
-- this was September of 2015 --
everyone
said, there is no way. There is
no way. They
said, it will be 2018 at the
earliest.
And then it struck, and it
caught everybody
off-guard. They actually weren't
really ready
to make the detection. They were
still kind
of testing the machine and
banging on it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then?
JANNA LEVIN: And then it struck.
It came from
1.3 billion years ago. It struck
Louisiana.
About 10 milliseconds later, it
crosses the
continent and hits Washington
state and rings
that machine.
It is a spectacular detection.
JEFFREY BROWN: And let me ask
you finally,
Kip Thorne, one of the
scientists behind all
this, you quote him as saying
that our ability
to measure gravitational waves
will -- quote
-- "open a new window on the
universe."
JANNA LEVIN: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: So when you look
at what comes
from this, give us some sense of
what it might
mean.
JANNA LEVIN: So, I remember when
I was a young
student listening to Kip talk
about this,
before LIGO was even built, and
just before
2000, he always talked about a
new window.
And we liken it to maybe the
first that anyone
pointed a telescope at the sky.
You know,
Galileo was just looking at the
moon and Saturn.
He didn't foresee that there
were hundreds
of billions of stars in
collections called
galaxies, or that there were
quasars powered
by black holes.
These were things you couldn't
foresee. And
I think what Kip hopes and what
a lot of us
hope is that the future will be
so vast, beyond
what we have even imagined, that
there are
dark sources out there that will
ring these
detectors, they will record the
sounds of
space, and there will be things
we have never
even predicted before.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, the
new book is
"Black Hole Blues."
Janna Levin, thanks so much.
JANNA LEVIN: Thanks so much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And finally
tonight, our
"NewsHour" Shares, something
that caught our
eye that might be of interest to
you, too.
President Obama honored 13 law
enforcement
officers at the White House
today with the
Medal of Valor. The award
recognizes those
who exhibited exceptional
courage in the face
of great danger to protect
others.
One by one, President Obama
bestowed the day's
medals on those whose acts where
not only
brave, but instinctive. Los
Angeles police
officer Donald Thompson suffered
first- and
second-degree burns pulling an
unconscious
victim from a burning car.
Officers Jason
Salas and Robert Sparks and
Captain Raymond
Bottenfield ended a deadly
shooting rampage
at Santa Monica College.
And Philadelphia Police Sergeant
Robert Wilson
III gave his life to protect
innocent customers
and employees during a video
store robbery.
His wife accepted the medal on
his behalf.
But all 13, the president said,
went above
and beyond the call of duty.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
In all of these places in each
of these moments,
these officers were true to
their oaths.
To a person, each of these
honorees acted
without regard for their own
safety. They
stood up to dangerous
individuals brandishing
assault rifles, handguns and
knives. Each
of them will tell you very
humbly the same
thing: They were just doing
their jobs. They
were doing what they had to do,
what they
were trained to do, like on any
other day.
We want you to know we could not
be prouder
of you and we couldn't be
prouder of your
families for all the
contributions that you
make.
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Obama signed a
package of bills aimed at
protecting and honoring
public safety officers into law
shortly before
the ceremony.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we explore the
growing problem
of harassment of Muslim-American
students
in U.S. public schools.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.